Remake custom auth UI docs (#2577)
wasp-lang/wasp: web/docs/auth/email/create-your-own-ui.md

---
title: Create your own UI
---

> In Email authentication, users log in with their email address and a password. On signup, Wasp validates the data and sends a verification email. The user record is not active until the link in the verification email is clicked. Moreover, the user can later reset their password through their email with a similar flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the email auth provider, users log in with their email address and a password. On signup, Wasp validates the data and sends a verification email. The user account is not active until the user clicks the link in the verification email. Also, the user can reset their password through a similar flow.
```

We tend to avoid passive voice as per https://wasp.sh/docs/writingguide

:::tip
Read more about the default email and password validation rules in the [auth overview docs](../overview.md#default-validations).
:::

> Even though Wasp offers premade [Auth UI](../ui.md) for your authentication flows, there are times where you might want more customization, so we also give you the option to create your own UI and call Wasp's auth actions on your own code, similar to how Auth UI does it under the hood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though Wasp offers premade [Auth UI](../ui.md) for your authentication flows, there are times when you might want more customization, so we also give you the option to create your own UI and call Wasp's auth actions with your own code, similar to how Auth UI does it under the hood.
```
When unsure, I use Grammarly to check my writing, I'd advise you to do the same :)

        placeholder="Email"
      />
      <input
        type="password"
        value={password}
        onChange={(e) => setPassword(e.target.value)}
        placeholder="Password"
      />
      <button type="submit">Sign Up</button>
    </form>
  )
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts" label="TypeScript">

```tsx title="src/pages/auth.tsx"
import { signup } from 'wasp/client/auth'

import { useState } from 'react'

export function Signup() {
  const [email, setEmail] = useState('')
  const [password, setPassword] = useState('')
  const [error, setError] = useState<Error | null>(null)
  const [needsConfirmation, setNeedsConfirmation] = useState(false)

  async function handleSubmit(event: React.FormEvent<HTMLFormElement>) {
    event.preventDefault()
    setError(null)
    try {
      await signup({ email, password })
      setNeedsConfirmation(true)
    } catch (error: unknown) {
      console.error('Error during signup:', error)
      setError(error as Error)
    }
  }

  if (needsConfirmation) {
    return (
      <p>
        Check your email for the confirmation link. If you don't see it, check
        spam/junk folder.
      </p>
    )

>   }

Reviewer: One thing I realized now, we should also then show the:
- verify email flow `import { verifyEmail } from 'wasp/client/auth'`
- reset password flow `import { requestPasswordReset, resetPassword } from 'wasp/client/auth'`

I know this adds another layer of complexity to this PR, but I think it will be _amazing_ when we have this part in the docs!

---
title: Create your own UI
---

> The login and signup flows are pretty standard: they allow the user to sign up and then log in with their username and password. The signup flow validates the username and password and then creates a new user entity in the database.

Reviewer: Mentions `username` instead of `email`. The signup flow is more complex (the users need to verify the email for example) than the username flow.

> Read more about the default username and password validation rules in the [auth overview docs](../../auth/overview.md#default-validations).

Reviewer: Mentions username instead of email.

If you require more control in your authentication flow, you can achieve that in the following ways:

1. Create your UI and use `signup` and `login` actions.

> 1. Create your custom sign-up action which uses the lower-level API, along with your custom code.

Reviewer: I'd make this sentence more precise i.e. "along with your custom UI code" just to indicate that when you create the custom action, we expect you to call it from your custom UI.

}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts" label="TypeScript">

```tsx title="src/pages/auth.tsx"
import { login } from 'wasp/client/auth'

import { useState } from 'react'
import { useNavigate, Link } from 'react-router-dom'

export function LoginPage() {
  const [email, setEmail] = useState('')
  const [password, setPassword] = useState('')
  const [error, setError] = useState<Error | null>(null)
  const navigate = useNavigate()

  async function handleSubmit(event: React.FormEvent<HTMLFormElement>) {
    event.preventDefault()
    try {
      await login(email, password)
      navigate('/')
    } catch (error: unknown) {
      setError(error as Error)
    }
  }

  return <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>{/* ... */}</form>
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::note
When using the exposed `login()` function, make sure to implement your redirect on success login logic (e.g. redirecting to home).
:::

#### `signup()`

An action for signing up the user. This action does not log in the user, you still need to call `login()`.

It takes one argument:

- `userFields: object` <Required />

  It has the following fields:

  - `email: string` <Required />

  - `password: string` <Required />

  :::info

>   By default, Wasp will only save the `email` and `password` fields. If you want to add extra fields to your signup process, read about [defining extra signup fields](../auth/overview#customizing-the-signup-process).

Reviewer: Could you validate that this part is really true? I'm sure if it's possible to use extra signup fields when using the `signup` action. I think the users need to go full custom (the custom signup action).

Reviewer: Also, this link leads me to a 404 page.

  async function handleSubmit(event: React.FormEvent<HTMLFormElement>) {
    event.preventDefault()
    try {
      await signup({
        email,
        password,
      })
      await login(email, password)
      navigate('/')
    } catch (error: unknown) {
      setError(error as Error)
    }
  }

  return <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>{/* ... */}</form>
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### 2. Creating your custom sign-up action

The code of your custom sign-up action can look like this:

<Tabs groupId="js-ts">
<TabItem value="js" label="JavaScript">

```wasp title="main.wasp"
// ...

action customSignup {
  fn: import { signup } from "@src/auth/signup.js",
}
```

```js title="src/auth/signup.js"
import {
  ensurePasswordIsPresent,
  ensureValidPassword,
  ensureValidEmail,
  createProviderId,
  sanitizeAndSerializeProviderData,
  createUser,
} from 'wasp/server/auth'

export const signup = async (args, _context) => {
  ensureValidEmail(args)
  ensurePasswordIsPresent(args)
  ensureValidPassword(args)

  try {
    const providerId = createProviderId('email', args.email)
    const providerData = await sanitizeAndSerializeProviderData({
      hashedPassword: args.password,

>     })

Reviewer: This code is correct for the username & password, but not for email auth. If you take a look at the types, this function expects: 
```ts
export type EmailProviderData = {
    hashedPassword: string;
    isEmailVerified: boolean;
    emailVerificationSentAt: string | null;
    passwordResetSentAt: string | null;
};
```
when used for `'email'` provider. I'd test out all the code snippets written here to be 100% sure that what we are sharing with the users is correct. Otherwise, they'll get stuck and have to reach out to us in Discord.

    await createUser(
      providerId,
      providerData,
      // Any additional data you want to store on the User entity

>       {}

Reviewer: This line is where users can provide extra fields like they can when using `userSignupFields` field.

type CustomSignupInput = {
  email: string
  password: string
}
type CustomSignupOutput = {
  success: boolean
  message: string
}

export const signup: CustomSignup<
  CustomSignupInput,
  CustomSignupOutput
> = async (args, _context) => {
  ensureValidEmail(args)
  ensurePasswordIsPresent(args)
  ensureValidPassword(args)

  try {
    const providerId = createProviderId('email', args.email)
    const providerData = await sanitizeAndSerializeProviderData<'email'>({
      hashedPassword: args.password,
    })

    await createUser(
      providerId,
      providerData,
      // Any additional data you want to store on the User entity
      {}
    )
  } catch (e) {
    return {
      success: false,
      message: e.message,
    }
  }

  // Your custom code after sign-up.
  // ...

  return {
    success: true,
    message: 'User created successfully',
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

We suggest using the built-in field validators for your authentication flow. You can import them from `wasp/server/auth`. These are the same validators that Wasp uses internally for the default authentication flow.

#### Email

- `ensureValidEmail(args)`

>   Checks if the email is valid and throws an error if it's not. Read more about the validation rules [here](../auth/overview#default-validations).

Reviewer: This link leads me to 404 page

#### Password

- `ensurePasswordIsPresent(args)`

  Checks if the password is present and throws an error if it's not.

- `ensureValidPassword(args)`

>   Checks if the password is valid and throws an error if it's not. Read more about the validation rules [here](../auth/overview#default-validations).

Reviewer: This link leads me to 404 page
